BigAnimal: BDR support (#2646)
EnterpriseDB/docs: product_docs/docs/biganimal/release/overview/02_high_availability.mdx

  - 02_high_availibility
---

BigAnimal supports three deployment architectures: 
- Single node
- Standard high availability
- Extreme high availability (beta)

> You choose which type of deployment you want when creating your cluster on the [Create Cluster](https://portal.biganimal.com/create-cluster) page in the [BigAnimal](https://portal.biganimal.com) portal.  

Reviewer: Shouldn't this say "type of cluster", not "type of deployment"?

Reviewer 2: It should say "type of cluster" to match the UI

## Single node

For nonproduction use cases where high availability is not a primary concern, a cluster deployment with high availability not enabled provides one primary with no standby servers for failover or read-only workloads. 

> In case of permanent unavailability of the primary, a restore from a backup is required. 

Author: ```suggestion
In case of the primary being permanently unavailable, a restore from a backup is required. 
```

![*BigAnimal Cluster4*](images/Single-Node-Diagram-2x.png)

## Standard high availability

> The high availability option is provided to minimize downtime in cases of failures. High-availability clusters—one *primary* and two *replicas*—are configured automatically, with replicas staying up to date through physical streaming replication. In cloud regions with availability zones, clusters are provisioned across multiple availability zones to provide fault tolerance in the face of a datacenter failure.

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should make it clear that the availability will be in the same region. For example:

"If supported by the cloud region, clusters are provisioned across multiple availability zones in that region."

Reviewer: That doesn't read clearer to me - I'd just remove "multiple availability" from the second half of the sentence. The rest of the information re: fault tolerance is important.

-   Replicas are usually called *standby servers*. 
-   In case of temporary or permanent unavailability of the primary, a standby replica becomes the primary.

![*BigAnimal Cluster4*](images/HA-diagram-2x.png)

Incoming client connections are always routed to the current primary. In case of failure of the primary, a standby replica is automatically promoted to primary, and new connections are routed to the new primary. When the old primary recovers, it rejoins the cluster as a replica.

By default, replication is synchronous to one replica and asynchronous to the other. That is, one replica must confirm that a transaction record was written to disk before the client receives acknowledgment of a successful commit. In PostgreSQL terms, `synchronous_commit` is set to `on` and `synchronous_standby_names` is set to `ANY 1 (replica-1, replica-2)`. You can modify this behavior on a per-transaction, per-session, per-user, or per-database basis with appropriate `SET` or `ALTER` commands.

## Extreme high availability (beta)

> Extreme high availability clusters are powered by EDB Postgres Distributed, a logical replication tool that delivers more advanced cluster management compared to a physical replication based system. The primary component of EDB Postgres Distributed is Bi-Directional Replication (BDR). BDR is a PostgreSQL extension providing multi-leader replication and data distribution with advanced conflict management, data-loss protection, and throughput up to 5X faster than native logical replication, and enables distributed PostgreSQL clusters with high availability up to five 9s. 

Author: @ba-edb do we need to redo the architecture diagram then? I think we need to align the narrative with the diagram to avoid confusion.

> Extreme high availability clusters are powered by EDB Postgres Distributed, a logical replication tool that delivers more advanced cluster management compared to a physical replication based system. The primary component of EDB Postgres Distributed is Bi-Directional Replication (BDR). BDR is a PostgreSQL extension providing multi-leader replication and data distribution with advanced conflict management, data-loss protection, and throughput up to 5X faster than native logical replication, and enables distributed PostgreSQL clusters with high availability up to five 9s. 

Author: This is now:
Extreme high availability clusters are powered by EDB Postgres Distributed, a logical replication platform that delivers more advanced cluster management compared to a physical replication based system.

> Extreme high availability clusters require EDB Postgres Extended Server as the database type. EDB Postgres Extended Server is fully compatible with community PostgreSQL. 

Reviewer 3: "EDB Postgres Extended Server or EPAS"?

> During the Beta, the components of an extreme high availability cluster are all in one cloud region with the nodes distributed among three availability zones (A, B, C). One BDR node is designated the *leader* node (A.1). High Availability Routing for Postgres (HARP) routes all application traffic in a single data center or region to the leader node, which acts as the principle write target to reduce the potential for data conflicts. HARP leverages a distributed consensus model to determine availability of the BDR nodes in the cluster. On failure or unavailability of the leader, HARP elects a new leader and redirects application traffic. Together with the core capabilities of BDR, this mechanism of routing application traffic to the leader node enables fast failover and switchover without risk of data loss. 

Reviewer: We don't need to qualify this paragraph with "During the Beta".

Reviewer: We shouldn't talk about HARP here.

Extreme high availability clusters can be deployed with either EDB Postgres Advanced Server or EDB Postgres Extended Server as the database type. EDB Postgres Extended Server is PostgreSQL compatible. 

The components of an extreme high availability cluster are all in one cloud region with the nodes distributed among three availability zones (A, B, C). One BDR node is designated the *leader* node (A.1). High Availability Routing for Postgres (HARP) routes all application traffic in a single data center or region to the leader node, which acts as the principle write target to reduce the potential for data conflicts. HARP leverages a distributed consensus model to determine availability of the BDR nodes in the cluster. On failure or unavailability of the leader, HARP elects a new leader and redirects application traffic. Together with the core capabilities of BDR, this mechanism of routing application traffic to the leader node enables fast failover and switchover without risk of data loss. 

> The leader node exists in one availability zone along with a *shadow* node. In another availability zone, there are two more shadow nodes. A third availability zone contains a *witness* node. The shadow nodes wait to take over when needed. If the leader node loses contact, BigAnimal switches immediately to a shadow node to continue processing. The witness node, as an odd numbered node, can make decisions that require consensus, such as generating new global sequences or distributed DDL operations. This is a normal BDR node that is deliberately set up not to replicate any tables or data to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extreme High Availability clusters deploy four data-hosting "BDR" nodes across two availability zones. One of these nodes will be the leader at any given time. The rest are typically referred to as "shadow" nodes. Any shadow node can be promoted to leadership at any time by the HARP router. The third availability zone contains one node called the "witness". This node does not host data; it exists only for management purposes, to support operations that require consensus in case of an availability zone failure.
```

## Extreme high availability (beta)

Extreme high availability clusters are powered by EDB Postgres Distributed, a logical replication tool that delivers more advanced cluster management compared to a physical replication based system. The primary component of EDB Postgres Distributed is Bi-Directional Replication (BDR). BDR is a PostgreSQL extension providing multi-leader replication and data distribution with advanced conflict management, data-loss protection, and throughput up to 5X faster than native logical replication, and enables distributed PostgreSQL clusters with high availability up to five 9s. 

Extreme high availability clusters can be deployed with either EDB Postgres Advanced Server or EDB Postgres Extended Server as the database type. EDB Postgres Extended Server is compatible with open source PostgreSQL. 

> During the beta, the components of an extreme high availability cluster are all in one cloud region with the nodes distributed among three availability zones (A, B, C). One BDR node is designated the *leader* node (A.1). High Availability Routing for Postgres (HARP) routes all application traffic in a single data center or region to the leader node, which acts as the principle write target to reduce the potential for data conflicts. HARP leverages a distributed consensus model to determine availability of the BDR nodes in the cluster. On failure or unavailability of the leader, HARP elects a new leader and redirects application traffic. Together with the core capabilities of BDR, this mechanism of routing application traffic to the leader node enables fast failover and switchover without risk of data loss. 

Author: ```suggestion
The components of an extreme high availability cluster are all in one cloud region with the nodes distributed among three availability zones (A, B, C). One BDR node is designated the *leader* node (A.1). High Availability Routing for Postgres (HARP) routes all application traffic in a single data center or region to the leader node, which acts as the principle write target to reduce the potential for data conflicts. HARP leverages a distributed consensus model to determine availability of the BDR nodes in the cluster. On failure or unavailability of the leader, HARP elects a new leader and redirects application traffic. Together with the core capabilities of BDR, this mechanism of routing application traffic to the leader node enables fast failover and switchover without risk of data loss. 
```
